---
title: "What"
bg: orange
color: black
fa-icon: far fa-globe
---

## Migration of CSV support data to SQLite database
{: .text-align: left }

We plan to migrate to a SQLite database for `PROJ_LIB` and `GDAL_DATA`. You can
read more about a proposal to do so on the [MetaCRS
List](https://lists.osgeo.org/pipermail/metacrs/2015-August/000846.html) from
August of 2015.  This would include adding support for
[EPSG](http://www.epsg-registry.org/) and any overrides, historical
definitions, custom additions, or alternative dictionaries.  The purpose is to
reduce the fragility of the CSV "database" that PROJ, GDAL, and libgeotiff use,
collate it into a single entity that can be used and shared by other projects
such as [QGIS](https://qgis.org) and [PostGIS](https://postgis.net/), allow
easy inclusion of overrides and custom definitions, and add more functionality
(such as bounding-box lookups for definitions).

## WKT2 Support

OGC provided a standard iterating the "Well Known Text" format for coordinate
systems in 2015. You can [read the
standard](http://docs.opengeospatial.org/is/12-063r5/12-063r5.html) for more
information. Its uptake throughout the industry has been slowed by lack of
implementation support. We believe that support in the open source stack of
software – GDAL, PROJ, PostGIS, libgeotiff, and others – will provide the kick
that WKT2 needs to see wide(r) industry adoption.

WKT2 codifies the communication of coordinate system definitions and tightens
those definitions, especially in areas such as axis, vertical control, and
epochs. Communication of these more advanced coordinate system parameters are
becoming more common, and the need for software to interoperate definitions
continues to grow.

## Datum Pivots

PROJ datum transformations have typically pivoted through the [WGS
84](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Geodetic_System#A_new_World_Geodetic_System:_WGS_84)
datum, but there are are some significant problems with the approach. First,
not every transformation can be transitioned through WGS84. Second, the problem
of what to do about different time realizations of WGS84 exists. Third a
transition through WGS84 might be a lossy approximation. The recent release of
[PROJ 5.0.0](https://proj4.org), a completely volunteer effort that was led by
[SDFE](http://sdfe.dk/), provides an opportunity fix this longstanding issue
through the use of [late-binding
transformations](https://proj4.org/operations/transformations/deformation.html)
that PROJ 5+ now supports.
