---
title: "Why"
bg: blue
color: black
fa-icon: fas fa-map
---

Coordinate systems in [GDAL](http://gdal.org), [PROJ](https://proj4.org), and
[libgeotiff](https://trac.osgeo.org/geotiff/) are missing modern capabilities
and need a thorough refactoring:

* The dreaded ad hoc CSV databases in `PROJ_LIB` and `GDAL_DATA` are frustrating
for users, pose challenges for developers, and impede interoperability of definitions.

* GDAL and PROJ are missing [OGC WKT2](http://docs.opengeospatial.org/is/12-063r5/12-063r5.html) support.

* PROJ 5.0+ no longer requires datum transformation pivots through WGS84, which
  can introduce errors of up to 2m, but the rest of the tools do not
  take advantage of it.

## CSV database

The use of a [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/index.html)-based database for
EPSG and other definitions will allow the projects to add more capability
(area-aware validation), transition the custom peculiar data structures of the
projects to something more universally consumable, and promote definition
interoperability between many coordinate system handling software tools.

## WKT2

[OGC WKT2](http://docs.opengeospatial.org/is/12-063r5/12-063r5.html)  fixes
longstanding interoperability coordinate system definition discrepancies.
WKT2 contains tools for describing time-dependent coordinate reference systems.
PROJ 5+ is now capable of time-dependent transformations, but GDAL and other
tools do not yet support them.

Several countries are updating their geodetic infrastructure to include
time-dependent coordinate systems. For example,
[Australia](http://www.ga.gov.au/scientific-topics/positioning-navigation/datum-modernisation)
and the [United
States](https://www.ngs.noaa.gov/datums/newdatums/index.shtml) are adapting
time-dependent coordinate systems in 2020 and 2022, respectively.  The familiar
NAD83 and NAVD88 in North America being replaced by `NATRF2022` and
`NAPGD2022`, and the industry **WILL** have to adapt to these challenges sooner
or later.

# WGS84 Pivot

PROJ previously required datum transformation that pivoted through WGS84 via a
7-parameter transform.  This pivot is a practical solution, but it can
introduce error of about two meters, and many legacy datums cannot be defined
in terms of WGS84. PROJ 5+ now provides the tools to support late-binding
through its [transformation pipeline
framework](https://proj4.org/usage/transformation.html#geodetic-transformation),
but GDAL and the rest of the tools cannot use it yet. Higher accuracy
transformations avoid stepping through WGS84 and eliminates extra
transformation steps with side-car data from a local geodetic authority.
