---
title: "What"
bg: orange
color: black
fa-icon: far fa-globe
---


# Technical details


## Migration of CSV support data to SQLite database
{: .text-align: left }

We plan to migrate to a SQLite database for `PROJ_LIB` and `GDAL_DATA`. You can
read more about a proposal to do so on the [MetaCRS
List](https://lists.osgeo.org/pipermail/metacrs/2015-August/000846.html) from
August of 2015.  This would include adding support for
[EPSG](http://www.epsg-registry.org/) and any overrides, historical
definitions, custom additions, or alternative dictionaries.  The purpose is to
reduce the fragility of the CSV "database" that PROJ, GDAL, and libgeotiff use,
collate it into a single entity that can be used and shared by other projects
such as [QGIS](https://qgis.org) and [PostGIS](https://postgis.net/), allow
easy inclusion of overrides and custom definitions, and add more functionality
(such as bounding-box lookups for definitions).

## WKT2 Support

OGC provided [a standard](http://docs.opengeospatial.org/is/12-063r5/12-063r5.html) iterating the "Well Known Text" format for coordinate
systems in 2015. Its uptake throughout the industry has been slowed by lack of
implementation support. We believe that support in the open source stack of
software – GDAL, PROJ, PostGIS, libgeotiff, and others – will provide the kick
that WKT2 needs to see wide(r) industry adoption.

WKT2 codifies the communication of coordinate system definitions and tightens
those definitions, especially in areas such as axis, vertical control, and
epochs. Communication of these more advanced coordinate system parameters are
becoming more common, and the need for software to interoperate definitions
continues to grow.

## Datum Pivots

PROJ datum transformations have typically pivoted through the [WGS
84](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Geodetic_System#A_new_World_Geodetic_System:_WGS_84)
datum, but there are are some significant problems with the approach. First,
not every transformation can be transitioned through WGS84. Second, the problem
of what to do about different time realizations of WGS84 exists. Third a
transition through WGS84 might be a lossy approximation. The recent release of
[PROJ 5.0.0](https://proj4.org), a completely volunteer effort that was led by
Kristian Evers of [SDFE](http://sdfe.dk/), provides an opportunity fix this longstanding issue
through the use of [late-binding
transformations](https://proj4.org/operations/transformations/deformation.html)
that PROJ 5+ now supports.

Schematically the current situation is that GDAL has a simplified object
modelling of SRS support with a single class, OGRSpatialReference, which
internally maintains a tree structure reflecting in 1-1 relationship the
hierarchical WKTv1 representation of the SRS. The class has a number of helpers
to set projection methods, setup the geographical CRS, import from / export to
WKTv1, import from / export to PROJ representation, build a
geographical/projected/geocentric/vertical/compound SRS from a EPSG CRS code.
It is rather convenient to use, but strongly tied to WKTv1, its keywords, its
tree structure.

To be able to support WKTv1 and WKTv2, we will select a more object oriented
approach with a number of C++ classes that will model the various CRS concepts.
For that design, we will take inspiration from the works done in the GeoAPI OGC
standard (org.opengis.georeferencing.\* class hierarchy), and its
implementation by the Apache SIS project, which themselves are strongly
inspired on the underlying ISO 19111 modeling (whose WKTv2 is an
implementation). The following classes will be likely introduced:
CoordinateReferenceSystem(and its derived classes GeographicalCRS,
ProjectedCRS, CompoundCRS, VerticalCRS, TimeCRS, DerivedCRS, …),
CoordinateSystem, Datum, Ellipsoid, Conversion, .... We will not completely
adopt GeoAPI, because from our point of view, it has the classical default of
Java based software of unnecessary multiplicating interfaces and classes, which
makes the object model hard to understand and manipulate.

We will actually implement this in PROJ itself, so this can be usable by
projects that do not need the GDAL dependency, and because it will be more
convenient to have the object modelling and the underlying computational
capabilities traditionally offered by PROJ in closer synchronization.

Once that modelling will be in place, the following functionalities will have
to be implemented:

* instantiate the objects from a WKTv1 and WKTv2 representation

* export to WKTv1 and WKTv2 (when possible, given the limitation
of each format)

* add a validation function of WKTv2 representation

* port the current existing helpers of the OGRSpatialReference class to the new
  object system.

* adapt the GDAL GeoPackage driver to properly deal with WKTv2

* adapt all existing GDAL that have write capabilities to be able to deal with a potential
input as WKTv2, and in which case use WKTv2 -> WKTv1 conversion methods

## PROJ: SQLITE-based version of the EPSG database

* Use of a SQLITE version of the EPSG database (converted from the PostgreSQL
  database dump originally provided by EPSG), stored in PROJ library, with
  additional tables to be able to provide overrides (the EPSG database may
  contain parameters not preferred by the community, or not directly usable by
  the GDAL / PROJ stack). With proper indexes to be able to do fast queries in
  it. In source version control, the database will be stored as a text dump for
  better traceability of changes. The binary version of the database will be
  produced during the release procedure.

* Conversion of EPSG PostgreSQL dump to SQLite can be found at
  [https://github.com/hobu/crs](https://github.com/hobu/crs)

* PROJ will need to be able to instantiate its CRS and Conversion classes from
  the content of the tables of the SQLITE database.

## Other improvements

* PROJ: Use of area of use of source and target coordinate systems when building a coordinate transform

* PROJ/GDAL: Offering to the user (through API or gdaltransform utility) the
  choice to select an appropriate transformation method is the default choice
  does not fit its needs.

* GDAL: Support for 4D coordinates in the OGRCoordinateTransform class, to be
  able to use corresponding PROJ 5 capabilities

* GDAL: adding a -ct switch to gdaltransform, gdalwarp and ogr2ogr utilities
  (and their library versions) to specify a coordinate transformation
  toolchain, either using PROJ 5 pipeline syntax, or WKT2 coordinate operations

* GDAL: Axis order issues. A common issue is vector formats reporting their
  geometries with coordinates in longitude, latitude order (“GIS friendly”
  order), while referencing a geodetic SRS whole axis order in the EPSG
  database is latitude, longitude. Similar situation for some projected
  coordinate systems with a Northing, Easting axis order in the EPSG database.
  The solution used by GDAL up to now was to expose the WKT definition of the
  SRS, with the AXIS part stripped off. This is middly satisfactory. We propose
  that drivers report the conformant WKT definition, but expose a
  GetDataAxisMapping() method to map from the geometry axis order to the the
  SRS axis order. And similarly for raster formats. Currently, GDAL supports
  EPSG:XXXX and EPSGA:XXXX syntaxes: the first one will eventually strip axis
  order definition for SRS with GIS “unfriendly” order, while the second one
  (rarely used to the best of our knowledge) gives the exact EPSG
  representation. As part of this work, we’ll probably make EPSG:XXXX behaviour
  align on EPSGA:XXXX behaviour. This will have backward compatibility impacts,
  as for example “gdaltransform -s_srs EPSG:4326 -t_srs EPSG:32631” will now
  expect input coordinates to be in latitude, longitude order. To limit them,
  we will introduce a EPSG_GIS_AXIS: prefix that will resolve to a GIS friendly
  order SRS definition.

## libgeotiff
Currently, each time a new version of the EPSG database is released and adopted
by the “C” stack, it is first imported in libgeotiff in a PostgreSQL database,
from which a Python script derives CSV files that directly match a table of the
EPSG database (for example list of ellipsoids, prime meridians, datums), and a
few added value ones (reconstructed geographic and projected coordinate
systems, definition including TOWGS84 clauses). Those CSV files are used
currently by libgeotiff itself (when the GeoTIFF tags only contain a CRS
number, and it must expose its sub-elements: datum, ellipsoid, projection
method and values) and GDAL. GDAL then uses it to instantiate a
OGRSpatialReference object / WKTv1 representation for its own purpose, and use
its capability to export it as a PROJ string to build the ‘epsg’ text file used
by PROJ. libgeotiff will be upgraded to use the EPSG database provided by the updated PROJ.


