---
title: "What"
bg: orange
color: black
fa-icon: far fa-globe
---


# Technical details


## Migration of CSV support data to SQLite database
{: .text-align: left }

We plan to migrate to a SQLite database for `PROJ_LIB` and `GDAL_DATA`. You can
read more about a proposal to do so on the [MetaCRS
List](https://lists.osgeo.org/pipermail/metacrs/2015-August/000846.html) from
August of 2015.  This would include adding support for
[EPSG](http://www.epsg-registry.org/) and any overrides, historical
definitions, custom additions, or alternative dictionaries.  The purpose is to
reduce the fragility of the CSV "database" that PROJ, GDAL, and libgeotiff use,
collate it into a single entity that can be used and shared by other projects
such as [QGIS](https://qgis.org) and [PostGIS](https://postgis.net/), allow
easy inclusion of overrides and custom definitions, and add more functionality
(such as bounding-box lookups for definitions).

## WKT2 Support

OGC provided [a standard](http://docs.opengeospatial.org/is/12-063r5/12-063r5.html) iterating the "Well Known Text" format for coordinate
systems in 2015. Its uptake throughout the industry has been slowed by lack of
implementation support. We believe that support in the open source stack of
software – GDAL, PROJ, PostGIS, libgeotiff, and others – will provide the kick
that WKT2 needs to see wide(r) industry adoption.

WKT2 codifies the communication of coordinate system definitions and tightens
those definitions, especially in areas such as axis, vertical control, and
epochs. Communication of these more advanced coordinate system parameters are
becoming more common, and the need for software to interoperate definitions
continues to grow.

## Datum Pivots

PROJ datum transformations have typically pivoted through the [WGS
84](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Geodetic_System#A_new_World_Geodetic_System:_WGS_84)
datum, but there are are some significant problems with the approach. First,
not every transformation can be transitioned through WGS84. Second, the problem
of what to do about different time realizations of WGS84 exists. Third a
transition through WGS84 might be a lossy approximation. The recent release of
[PROJ 5.0.0](https://proj4.org), a completely volunteer effort that was led by
Kristian Evers of [SDFE](http://sdfe.dk/), provides an opportunity fix this longstanding issue
through the use of [late-binding
transformations](https://proj4.org/operations/transformations/deformation.html)
that PROJ 5+ now supports.

## Proposed GDAL Enhancements and Refactoring

GDAL currently has a simplified object modelling of SRS support with a single
class,
[OGRSpatialReference](http://www.gdal.org/classOGRSpatialReference.html), which
internally maintains a tree structure reflecting in 1-1 relationship the
hierarchical WKTv1 representation of the SRS.

The class has a number of helpers that do various things:

* set projection methods
* setup the geographical CRS
* import from / export to WKTv1
* import from / export to PROJ representation
* build a geographical/projected/geocentric/vertical/compound SRS from a EPSG CRS code

OGRSpatialReference is convenient to use but strongly tied to WKTv1, its
keywords, its tree structure.  To be able to support both WKTv1 and WKTv2, we
will select a more object oriented approach with a number of C++ classes that
will model the various CRS concepts.

For that design, we will take inspiration from the works done in the [GeoAPI
OGC standard](http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/geoapi)
(`org.opengis.georeferencing.\*` class hierarchy), and its implementation by
the [Apache SIS project](http://sis.apache.org/), which themselves are strongly
inspired on the underlying ISO 19111 modeling (whose WKTv2 is an
implementation).

The following classes will be likely introduced:

* CoordinateReferenceSystem
    * GeographicalCRS
    * ProjectedCRS
    * CompoundCRS
    * VerticalCRS
    * TimeCRS
    * DerivedCRS
    * …
    * CoordinateSystem
    * Datum
    * Ellipsoid
    * Conversion

We will not completely adopt GeoAPI, because from our point of view, it has the
classical default of Java based software of unnecessary multiplicating
interfaces and classes, which makes the object model hard to understand and
manipulate.

The implementation will live in PROJ itself, so this can be usable by projects
that do not need the GDAL dependency. It will be more convenient to have the
object modelling and the underlying computational capabilities traditionally
offered by PROJ in closer synchronization.

Once that modelling will be in place, the following functionalities will be
implemented:

* instantiate the objects from a WKTv1 and WKTv2 representation

* export to WKTv1 and WKTv2 (when possible, given the limitation
of each format)

* add a validation function of WKTv2 representation

* port the current existing helpers of the OGRSpatialReference class to the new
  object system.

* adapt the GDAL GeoPackage driver to properly deal with WKTv2

* adapt all existing GDAL that have write capabilities to be able to deal with a potential
input as WKTv2, and in which case use WKTv2 -> WKTv1 conversion methods

## PROJ: SQLite-based version of the EPSG database

* Use of a SQLite version of the EPSG database (converted from the PostgreSQL
  database dump originally provided by EPSG), stored in PROJ library, with
  additional tables to be able to provide overrides (the EPSG database may
  contain parameters not preferred by the community, or not directly usable by
  the GDAL / PROJ stack). It will contain proper indexes for fast queries. The
  database will be stored as a text dump for better traceability of changes in
  version control. The binary version of the database will be produced during
  the release procedure.

* A procedure to convert the EPSG PostgreSQL dump to SQLite can be found at
  [https://github.com/hobu/crs](https://github.com/hobu/crs)

* PROJ will be enhanced to instantiate its CRS and Conversion classes from
  the content of the tables of the SQLITE database.

### Other improvements

* PROJ: Use area of use for source and target coordinate systems when building a coordinate transform

* PROJ/GDAL: Offer the user (through API or gdaltransform utility) the
  choice to select an appropriate transformation method if the default choice
  does not fit its needs.

* GDAL: Provide support for 4D coordinates in the OGRCoordinateTransform class, to be
  able to use corresponding PROJ 5 capabilities

* GDAL: adding a `-ct` switch to gdaltransform, gdalwarp and ogr2ogr utilities
  (and their library versions) to specify a coordinate transformation
  toolchain, either using PROJ 5 pipeline syntax, or WKT2 coordinate operations

* GDAL: Axis order issues. A common issue is vector formats reporting their
  geometries with coordinates in longitude, latitude order (“GIS friendly”
  order), while referencing a geodetic SRS whole axis order in the EPSG
  database is latitude, longitude. Similar situation for some projected
  coordinate systems with a Northing, Easting axis order in the EPSG database.
  The solution used by GDAL up to now was to expose the WKT definition of the
  SRS, with the AXIS part stripped off. This is middly satisfactory. We propose
  that drivers report the conformant WKT definition, but expose a
  `GetDataAxisMapping()` method to map from the geometry axis order to the the
  SRS axis order. We would also add it for raster formats. Currently, GDAL supports
  `EPSG:XXXX` and `EPSGA:XXXX` syntaxes: the first one will eventually strip axis
  order definition for SRS with GIS “unfriendly” order, while the second one
  (rarely used to the best of our knowledge) preserves the exact EPSG
  representation. As part of this work, we will probably make `EPSG:XXXX` behaviour
  align on `EPSGA:XXXX` behaviour. This will have backward compatibility impacts,
  as for example `gdaltransform -s_srs EPSG:4326 -t_srs EPSG:32631` will now
  expect input coordinates to be in latitude, longitude order. To limit them,
  we will introduce a `EPSG_GIS_AXIS:`prefix that will resolve to a GIS friendly
  order SRS definition.

## libgeotiff
libgeotiff will be fully upgraded to use the EPSG database provided by the updated PROJ.

The process which creates the EPSG database for libgeotiff is fraught.
Currently, each time a new version of the EPSG database is released and adopted
by the “C” stack, it is first imported in libgeotiff in a PostgreSQL database,
from which a Python script derives CSV files that directly match a table of the
EPSG database (for example list of ellipsoids, prime meridians, datums), and a
few added value ones (reconstructed geographic and projected coordinate
systems, definition including `TOWGS84` clauses). This complexity will be
removed from libgeotiff and align its behavior with PROJ and GDAL in regard
to definitions and their creation workflow.


# Extra funds

Should any extra funds be available, they will be applied toward the maintenance
and improvement of GDAL, libgeotiff, PROJ, and related projects.
